two weeks after South Africa's
presentation in front of the
international court of justice against
Israel for a presumptive violation on
the convention for the prevention of
genocide today finally the court has
actually issued a preliminary ruling to
discuss it with us is Lu Moren oampo
former prosecutor of the IC thank you
for being with
to uh Mr oampo could you basically just
walk us through the ruling what is that
happened today what did the court say
today
the summary could be the judges were
tough on Israel that a genocide is a
serious imminent the risk of genocide
for all the people in Gaza that were
very clear and strong but they were in
some
way gave Israel time to
adjust they they gave Israel the time to
come back to measures to transform
situation in Gaza and they had to report
in one month so that why it's a mixed
combination that
shows that the 15 judges who made the
majority made compromise between them
particularly the president of the Court
no the US judge she she came from a
state department experience so the fact
that she vote
for the majority saying is a r of
genocide very clear it's really
important and also the the the the the
measures giving space to Israel is also
I think part of her
power it does fall far short from what
South Africa actually did request which
was essentially the cessation of Israeli
uh operations in the territory of Gaza
right well well well maybe it's not
exactly what South Africa requested but
I think South Africa deserve recognition
and gratitude because South Africa is
just one of 153 countries including
Germany and us who are State parties of
the genocide convention all of them have
an obligation era HS as to say say the
court so an obligation not just to
behave themselves all the state party
chai convention have the obligation to
prevent other states to commit the
crimes and that was South Africa dit
South Africa we need to be gr to be
thankful for South Africa MOVE because
trigger a different dimension no more
Wars law Lo legal discussions that is
the opportunity that South Africa is
giving us transform a war in yeah
critics would say that I mean the
possibility of this having actually
direct effect on the ground I mean we
had been seeing uh the death of
civilians on a daily basis are actually
very limited uh do you see it the same
way no I
think no I think people don't understand
the how the international legal system
works because if you see the core
decision is wrong but it also quote
article three of the genocide convention
and talking about
complicity and that's the
message the US cannot support a similar
campaign now because could be a complice
of
genocide so that why what I expect is
now NYU yes is rejecting the coration
but Biden has no the same space
President Biden has to one months
transform the game so you think that to
some degree this actually will also
exert very powerful force on Israel
allies who up until this point have
given Israel more or less a free pass in
terms of conducting its military
operations well first point for me and I
was pleased and for me it was a pleasure
to listen a formal legal language
talking about the genocide and and there
are they say there are 1.7 million
people this place mean in in a in a
population of 2.2 million people so
imagine like a 60 more than 60 million
people in Germany it's it's huge the
majority of the people this place and
93% of them starving so that is what the
court describ quoting different sources
so that is very compelling and his idea
this could not happen yes no one like
Hamas attacking Israelis no one
condemned that everyone accept Israel
had the right to defend itself but this
could not happen this attack on civilian
population could not happen and that is
for me the most important part or very
important part of the decision giving us
sense of order we live in a in a 21st
century civilization not in in in in in
the Roman Empire time when Barbarian
could be killed no so then the the
second part if I may the the
decision the call was is a compromise
obviously it's a compromise I was
expecting something much bigger but it's
a compromise and but it's interesting
compromise because it give it give us a
space to political leaders to find a
solution and that the moment of Germany
us stopping Israel Israel has a
right-wing government Israel Netanyahu
is fighting with this with the Supreme
Court in Israel and now fighting with
the international court of justice okay
if we believe low we have to stop
it how adverse do you think that this uh
this ruling uh this preliminary ruling
is for Israel what do you think the
effect direct perhaps uh effect on
Israel will be
well the court is saying to Israel what
you are doing is a very imminent risk of
genocide for these people in Gaza what
else could be good or imagine
Israel State built to avoid the 194 the
Nazi Genocide is now committing a
genocide that is what they saying and
that's why right now the judge were very
careful they say it's an imminent reason
they are not saying it did it they say
it's an imminent risk that the victim
suffer genocide that what they say
imminent risk and that why to protect
them measure have to be
taken that what the court is saying
that's hug it's a l it's a very careful
language but it's hug
so Israel have to adjust now this this
is not a court of Palestinian this is
Court of people from all over the world
and that's why it's so important the US
judge rule in favor of the
majority the um application enforcement
of the ruling will much depend uh
essentially on the International
Community correct there is no actual
mechanism for enforcement of the rulings
even though this is now essentially
becomes becomes International Juris
Prudence
right
well that why is interesting because the
court did not say stop the blockade stop
the bombing did not give this type of
specific infraction that I expected the
court did something different that could
be smarter the cour say Israel had to
decide how to stop it came to us in a
month and to tell her what you are doing
so Israel now is on notice whatever you
are saying if you continue doing that is
a genocide and to tell us you are doing
something different you have to give us
a report and the court will decide so in
this sense the court keep enforcement
ability because it's forcing Israel to
do it and come back to the court the
court is also asking Israel to
essentially prevent and prosecute uh
potential violations to the convention
including uh the promotion or incitement
and it did essentially quote uh in the
preliminary ruling uh no fewer than for
uh essentially high ranking Israeli
politicians do you expect the Israeli
judicial system to turn its attention to
uh essentially its ruling
Coalition Well normally states don't
like to prosecute their own
people what I expect is the court will
start
proceedings but there was no real I will
see we'll see how the convention go
because basically the court is quoting
the president of Isel and the court is
is quoting the meid of the fence two key
characters
no but would it be would it be part of
the duty of the Israeli judicial system
at this point in order to essentially
act in accordance with the ruling to
actually look into those cases that were
actually on record named during the
proceedings
today well yes it will be and in fact
Israel is already conducting they say
some investigation instigation and in
fact that specific part of the ruling
was voted in favor by the Israeli judge
but judge Barack so judge Barack was
against the other part but on this part
on investiga instigation he was in
agreement so I that part is feasible but
the problem is not to punish people here
the priority is to prevent genocide and
that's why the issue is how Israel will
adjust this the the siege of Gaza how is
will adjust its tactic to bomb people to
bomb buildings what do you expect Israel
to do over the next couple of days
leading to the one month Benchmark that
the that the court has
established well net report thoric
immediately was very tough against the
court and I think now we we'll see
what's happening with the US the US now
I think this this decision is really
much is pretty much something that us
wanted because it's giving a space to us
to man maneuver I think now us is sent
the CIA director to qatal to negotiate a
new hostage release and that could be
Next Step a um pause in the conflict
based on freeing free the hostages that
could be a political maneuver to stop
the conflict for different reasons and
that could
happen the this is not the end of the
process now the the the the case will
move uh to the Merit phase can you
explain a little bit what that's about
when should be
expected
no no but this is the most important
decision this and the decision in a
month when Israel came with the measures
the final conclusion will be 8 years 10
years nine years will be
important because the way the court
build presedent we are now discussing
something similar than the decision on
Bosnia taken in 2007 so that's the court
system working so the the final decision
will important but not to protect the
Palestinians to protect the Palestinian
is now and you think that this will have
an immediate impact on protecting
Palestinian lives meaning in the next
couple of days I mean you know we follow
obviously the new cycle and we are
seeing these things daily do you think
that this would have an immediate impact
on the
ground I I I will mention the next two
weeks not two days I
believe now the ball this the core gave
the ball back to Israel and us has a
meaningful role because us is supporting
Israel politically Israel us veto exu
resolution and us is supporting Israel
military Israel Fleet is there
protecting Israel from Lebanon Hezbollah
and Iran the problem now is US support
to Israel could be complicity on
genocide
that's a new limit now and that why the
US had to adjust
drastically and the would be would be a
very difficult time for us to adjust
Netanyahu because Netanyahu is fighting
for survival and he's a survival he's a
big survival but now he's fighting to
stay in power it's not more about Israel
it's about himself so and then he is
running he has
no he cannot go back that why the next
weeks are about Palestinian but also
about the relation between us and and
Israel
government Mr that's all we have time
for but we're very very grateful uh for
joining us at do TR and hope to talk to
you again
soon very grateful for the
compation